# Mobile Development Reflection
By Frank Hattler

The best moment of this course was far and away the moment we pushed our app to production on the Google Play Store. As students we do not often have the task of producing a single deliverable over the course of 3 months as part of a class. Producing an Android application was a daunting challenge, but definitely rewarding. The following piece contains my thoughts on the course and how I developed over the course of the semester.

Technically this course was very challenging. Learning Android Development over the course of 3 months is monumentous task, next to impossible. There are build tools, IDE settings, thousands of Java classes, and operating system nuances that take a tremendous amount of expertise to master. Our application only handled a small corner of what Android development and yet the scope seemed incredibly broad. In this class I became far better at deciphering documentation, and applying comments on stack overflow to actual code. The fact that there is no definitive source or textbook forced me to improve my technical research skills and documentation comprehension. In addition to growing my ability to work with new libraries, working in Android also taught me about the scope of skills that are necessary to run software in production. Being able to write an application is only the beginning. Building, testing, deploying, and iterating on this cycle are also technically challenging tasks. I understand now why so much emphasis is placed on the DevOps movement that allows code to be deployed quickly.

Professionally this course taught me about the necessity of thinking about the whole picture. It is incredibly important, even as a developer, to understand the customer and how the product will be sold. This issue was incredibly important to our application, because it's a social network. Without users who would sign up for the application? No one! While it was ourside the scope of this class, thinking about ways to solve the cold start problem for our application was incredibly intersting. We were not able to implement it in the time we had, but I realized that integrating with other services would have made the application much better for new users, because they could easily add friends. I often thought about whether it would be better to integrate You In? with Facebook, or the devices contacts. Having the experience of building our own app gives perspective on the entire process that goes into creating a software product. The perspective will be incredibly valuable to me after I graduate and move into the professional world.

There's not much I would have changed about the way Ming taught the class. The first thing that comes to mind is that I really would have liked to better understand how to setup a project and how importing libraries and building them into the application works. This would have saved our team a huge amount of time and allowed us to focus more on the features of our application. That being said, struggling through compatability issues, gradle script failures, and seemingly impossible bugs was an incredible part of the learning experience and I'm not sure I would have wanted to give that up. I think that some overall guidance on how to use more of the Andorid tools would have been nice, but is not necessary. Better understanding the structure of an Android Application at a deep level would have been helpful to all teams (even those using React Native) from the start. Despite all this I don't think that learning it on my own was a bad method.

If I could do it over again, I would change a few things about our application. First, I would have spent more time designing the data model and thinking through cases. There were a couple of instances where we forced to do things inefficiently because we were stuck with a sub-optimal data model. It was great to get this experience and understand the tradeoffs of how information is stored in a large database, but taking a little bit more design time could have allowed us to spend implementation time on other features. It would have been nice to explore adding integration with contacts in this time, which would have taught us more about Android Permissions, and some of the pitfalls of accessing user's data. It definitely would have been cool to explore some of the issues around privacy in our app more deeply.

Finally if I had to change one thing about the class I think it would be the fact that most people were unable to test their application on physical devices. Being an iPhone user, I did not have an Android device, and thus was forced to use the emulator for testing. It would be great if the class could get 3-4 devices that groups could share for testing purpose. This would allow more feature development and testing and I think the more applications would use the capabilities of the phone like SMS and the camera.

Overall this was a great course in which I learned a ton, and grew tremendously as a developer. Building an application was an awesome experience and opened me up to the possibility of working on some of my own projects in the future. This was definitely one of the most useful CS courses I've taken at Tufts.



